---
subject: back-to-cantor
id: 13568509800
date: 2012-12-30 02:03:00
from:
  name: "Todd Trimble"
  md5: 563bc4b0fe01b601813163f0485f4d78
in-reply-to: 13568443200
published: true
---
"My gripe is with your use of "logicians and set theorists" and similar uses at the Café. I personally identify with both clans and yet I plea innocence for all the crimes that you and others have claimed here and elsewhere." -- Sorry! Where I wrote "logicians and set theorists in my comment", I only meant *some* logicians and set theorists; certainly not all! (I particularly was thinking of some in the FOM battles of long ago, whom I viewed as upholding a Kreiselian line.) Other than that, I don't think I was accusing people such as you of any "crimes" (and I certainly hold set theorists and logicians as a group in very high regard, to the point of awe actually). Anyway, sorry for not being clear there. 

"As Lawvere and Rosebruch said, the foundation of mathematics is something that everybody should be able to use and understand; it should serve as a basis for communication among mathematicians by clarifying basic concepts and understandings." I certainly agree wholeheartedly with you (and them) there. If you think I'm confused, maybe it's because I expressed myself poorly? I certainly find, for example, the analysis of logical quantification in terms of adjoints a "clarification of basic concepts and understandings". 

Finally, thanks for clarifying with regard to my first gripe. To me, the fact that ZFC and ETCS+R are equally strong as foundations is in my mind a commonplace, so it hadn't registered (as it probably should have) that your observation was more sociological than mathematical. This is really important to keep in mind. 
