---
subject: back-to-cantor
id: 13568347200
date: 2012-12-29 21:32:00
from:
  name: "Todd Trimble"
  md5: 563bc4b0fe01b601813163f0485f4d78
published: true
---
Thanks François -- I do appreciate the spirit in which this is written. However, I have two gripes or nitpicks. One: I don't like this absolute 'the' in "currently recognized as *the* foundation of mathematics". Because, after all, there is more than one recognized way of founding mathematics, as we have been discussing. If you want to say, "currently recognized as the predominant foundation of mathematics", then I would have no problem with that, but the absoluteness and added emphasis of your 'the' irritates me (sorry). Two: where CT typically bumps up against foundational issues is where we would like to manipulate large categories as perfectly legitimate mathematical objects, and there is certainly ongoing debate about the best way to deal with such things. But ETCS is not an outcome of this type of issue, AFAICT. 

If I may presume to speak for Lawvere (who invented ETCS), a particular friction here is more that logicians and set theorists commandeer the word "foundations" to mean a concretized membership-based set theory on top of Fregean logic (what Lawvere calls "speculative foundations", for reasons that are obscure to me), and reject the categorists' proposals, according to Kreisel's argument that they are about *organization* of mathematics and not about foundations *per se*. Lawvere's counter-argument is that this is an excessively narrow conception of foundations. Lawvere and Rosebrugh put it strongly: "A foundation makes explicit the essential features, ingredients, and operations of a science as well as its origins and general laws of development. The purpose of making these explicit is to provide a guide to the learning, use, and further development of the science. A "pure" foundation that forgets this purpose and pursues a speculative "foundations for its own sake is clearly a nonfoundation." 

Well, I'm sure those words sound aggressive; I reiterate that they belong to Lawvere and Rosebrugh. But an example of what Lawvere is referring to might be the categorical analysis of logic or logics (as interlocking systems of adjoints), e.g., finite limit logic, regular logic, coherent logic, etc. as a bona fide foundational topic. Another example might be that the actual uses made of sets by those who wish to develop number theory, elementary analysis, topology, etc. has little to do with set-theoretic encodings; those involved in developing such topics have greater need of e.g. the universal nature of products and quotients to guide them to the correct notion of product topology, quotient topology, and so on. Lawvere wishes to consider those needs as belonging to "foundations of mathematics" according to his sense of what those words should mean. 

I don't wish to derail the discussion -- I'm just trying to articulate what I think Lawvere's motivations were for ETCS, categorical logic, etc. with respect to foundations, which as I see it have little to do with the perennial questions of classes vs. sets (which seem not to exercise him very much). 
