---
subject: back-to-cantor
id: 13569129000
date: 2012-12-30 19:15:00
from:
  name: "François G. Dorais"
  md5: 7e4c1acfa13dc30227687d82abebf543
  url: http://dorais.org
in-reply-to: 13569061200
published: true
---
The most painful part for a set theorist is that ETCS has a very weak grasp of wellfoundedness. Wellfoundedness is one of the central pillars of Set Theory and I personally think it is the most important concept in Set Theory. Because of the Axiom of Foundation and the ordinal spine of the cumulative hierarchy, ZFC has both the usual $$\Pi_1$$ formulation of wellfoundedness and a $$\Sigma_1$$ formulation (via rank functions). This means that wellfoundedness is absolute for transitive models of ZFC, which is key to a very large part of Set Theory. ETCS only has the usual $$\Pi_1$$ formulation and consequently wellfoundedness does not transfer as well between models. The bottom line here is that the highly refined analysis of ZFC that set theorists have done has no natural analogue in ETCS. For a concrete example, a measurable cardinal makes perfect sense in ETCS since the idea of $$\set{0,1}$$-valued measure translates directly; ETCS starts having a rough time with normal measures and ETCS has very little understanding of the elementary embedding $$j:V \to M$$ resulting from the measure in ZFC (other than through the translation). 

A broader problem is that ETCS cannot directly use sets as data structures (the kind of sets where you can put stuff in and take stuff out) which is a really common use of sets. This can be done but ETCS needs a lot of annoying baggage to simulate this kind of data structure. This is a minor annoyance but it's hard to tolerate it knowing that a slightly more material view would allow one to use sets this way with no baggage at all. (This kind of annoyance is very similar to the kind of annoyance that material sets have when thinking structurally.) Since sets are so simple, versatile, and powerful when viewed as data structures in this way, this is a worthwhile thing to do. 

Yes, I am aware of ZF algebras but I hadn't thought of using them for this purpose. I am still thinking about what kind of system would be best for this. Right now, I'm testing out some hybrid systems with both membership and functions as primitives on an equal footing. The idea is to incorporate ZFC and ETCS as faithfully as possible and allow them to mix. So far, this is pretty interesting. It's fun to try to exploit the strengths of one to compensate for the weaknesses of the other. In any case, this are very preliminary thoughts. I'm open to suggestions and I will write another post when I get somewhere interesting.
