---
subject: back-to-cantor
id: 13569082200
date: 2012-12-30 17:57:00
from:
  name: "Todd Trimble"
  md5: 563bc4b0fe01b601813163f0485f4d78
in-reply-to: 13569045000
published: true
---
> The structural theories, on the other hand, tend to leave more room at the bottom for either flexibility or mystification as to what the sets are, focusing instead on what sets are for and how most directly to describe every possible thing you could do with sets 

That's sort of how I view things too, but I would like to say something about the "mystification". If I understand Lawvere's POV, we know basically what we mean by "sets" -- they are collections, just as you usually think of them. It's just that for him, it is *mathematically irrelevant* to ask what the elements "are" or what is their "substance". What is relevant to ask is: are these two elements (in a given set S, serving as a temporary universe of discourse) equal or not? Or: does this element x of S belong to that subset A of S? Only those types of questions are *mathematically* relevant. 

As for the ETCS axioms, I think Lawvere views them simply as *observed facts* about sets and functions (ZF sets and ZF functions if you like, or if you insist on a fixed background) as they are actually used by mathematicians in mathematically relevant ways. Certain of these facts serve to concentrate the essence of mathematical practice (or at least "most" of mathematical practice) in a small collection of axioms. Which is close to what you were saying. 
