---
subject: back-to-cantor
id: 13568443200
date: 2012-12-30 00:12:00
from:
  name: "François G. Dorais"
  md5: 7e4c1acfa13dc30227687d82abebf543
  url: http://dorais.org
in-reply-to: 13568347200
published: true
---
I emphasized 'the' to be provocative and to emphasize the fact that there is something fundamentally wrong with this state of affairs. As I said at the Café, this post is intended to reach out to set theorists, who are not necessarily as aware of the problem the ZFC hegemony is causing. It's probably best if you, and others who are already familiar with the issues, simply ignore that hook and let others bite. 

That said, I disagree with your correction. ZFC is not the predominant foundation, it is (essentially) the only accepted foundation. I guess it's not that clear that I am talking about the collective mind rather than the individual mind. The issue is again the communication problem that I keep emphasizing as a key issue. The current state of affairs is that if a mathematician does some work using alternate foundations, then they must also provide a translation into ZFC or else their work will not be integrated into mainstream mathematics. Otherwise, it will forever be cited with a caveat that the result was proven in this or that alternate system which may or may not be fully compatible with ZFC. As an extreme example, any analysts that use Brouwer's theorem that every (total) function $$[0,1]\to \mathbb{R}$$ is uniformly continuous in a paper will see their work rejected, but it is fine if they say "within the context of intuitionistic analysis" somewhere (and handle the consequences thereof). There are some exceptions to this, especially where the translation into ZFC is well-known. 

As for the second gripe, I think this was poorly phrased on my part. I didn't mean to imply that all of the things I mentioned are so closely entangled. The part about bumping into foundational issues was a tentative explanation why category theorists care about foundations so much about this while analysts and algebraists don't care much even though they experience the same basic annoyances. (The other tentative explanation is that leading category theorists just happen to care a lot, which is much more tenuous.) Anyway, I might add another footnote or make a minor edit to clarify this since your reading of what I wrote is completely fair though not as I intended. 

Now that the two gripes have been clarified, I find the rest of your comment very interesting and I would like to add a few comments. While I'm doing this, I will air out one of my own gripes. Please don't take it too seriously, I just want to vent some accumulated irritations. My gripe is with your use of "logicians and set theorists" and similar uses at the Café. I personally identify with both clans and yet I plea innocence for all the crimes that you and others have claimed here and elsewhere. In fact, I know that most logicians and set theorists are also innocent of those crimes, most of those that are guilty of some of these crimes have only committed only a few, and finally that those who are guilty on all counts are usually not logicians nor set theorists!Having aired out my gripe, let's get back to serious business. Lawvere and Rosebrugh got it right, but you and others are apparently confused about the difference between the object (foundations of mathematics) and the analysis of the object (a part of logic and set theory). As Lawvere and Rosebruch said, the foundation of mathematics is something that everybody should be able to use and understand; it should serve as a basis for communication among mathematicians by clarifying basic concepts and understandings. As I emphasized in the penultimate paragraph, ZFC should really be understood as a _formal reduction_ of the mathematical universe we all work in. The reason for this is that ZFC is much easier to analyze because of its simplicity. This _analysis_ is what much of logic and most of set theory is all about. (However, the main focus of Set Theory is very specialized and most set theorists don't care at all about foundations in the aspect being discussed here. When they do, they usually self-identify as logicians for that purpose.) In my opinion, the claim that ZFC is the foundation of mathematics is misplaced prescriptivism à la Bourbaki (who I would have loved not to mention here, but are nevertheless the main neither-logicians-nor-set-theorists who are guilty of all accusations I've seen here and at the Café). Bottom line: Yes! ZFC is a "speculative foundation" in the sense that it is "foundations for its own sake" as Lawvere and Rosebrugh put it. (I'm also not sure about the choice of word "speculative" but if I understood right, then I completely agree.) I would even add that this is one of the main points of ZFC! 

This whole topic is very confused and very confusing. I think the main culprit for the confusion is the foundational crisis of the early 20th century. The word "crisis" is important here. As with any crisis, the consequences were fear and panic and the responses were drastic. After a century, the crisis is gone and the fear and panic have (mostly) dissipated, but we still live with the responses. That's where I think the problem really is: have yet to move on. During this century, we have figured out most of the relevant parts of what can and cannot be reduced to a reasonably sound basis. We've also figured out a few auxiliary things such as the fact that we cannot reasonably hope for a provably sound basis and we have matured to accept that fact. It's the right time to undo the drastic part of the response to the crisis and expand to a more tolerant foundation that allows for most things that we know can be reduced to a reasonably sound basis, such as ZFC, ETCS, and others that have either been put to the test (such as ZFC) or reduced (such as ETCS). We are all vey hopeful that the main dangling thread, NF, will be verified to be sound in the near future. 

Finally, let me mention that I do feel some of your pain. As a logician deeply interested in foundations, I am interested in a lot of approaches in the analysis of foundations. One of the approaches I have been fond of has been the wonderful progression from regular logic, coherent logic, to geometric logic and beyond that is best understood through Category Theory. I've used these in all sorts of ways to tackle the issues I am concerned about. It has been very difficult to sell this approach to my colleagues, while most are open and intrigued there are some who resist with force, presumably as a result of past heated discussions. I'm still hopeful that I will be able to break through eventually, but for the time being these efforts have been in vain and some have actually been harmful. I am pushing for equality because I firmly believe that all these approaches have their own merits and they each allow us to understand parts of this unfathomably complex mathematical world we live in.
