---
subject: back-to-cantor
id: 13569061200
date: 2012-12-30 17:22:00
from:
  name: "Todd Trimble"
  md5: 563bc4b0fe01b601813163f0485f4d78
published: true
---
Hi, François. While I'm trying to understand better what you might have in mind regarding a unified foundation, I'll ask a question which I hope is not too unproductive: could you describe in more detail this "much pain to work in ETCS" for a set theorist? (If I had to guess, it might be like the slight terror one feels reading, "some assembly required", for example the construction of disjoint unions starting from scratch. But I'd rather hear your own impressions.) 

Incidentally, are you familiar with Algebraic Set Theory? It's something like a category theorist's account of ZF, from the point of view that the recursive structure of the cumulative hierarchy can be described in terms of an initial algebra of some sort. Roughly, it starts with a category (a pretopos), whose objects are thought of as "classes", and this category is equipped with a notion of smallness. Then, the cumulative hierarchy, when it exists, is defined to be initial among partially ordered classes (V, V. Remarkably, if one defines "membership" by x in y iff s(x) <= y, then for the initial object V, the structure (V, in) can be shown to satisfy the axioms of intuitionist ZF. More generally, if A is any class, the free "small-sup lattice equipped with an endofunction s" generated from A is a model of ZF + atoms A, and is an appropriate notion of "the cumulative hierarchy" generated from atoms A. 

It's quite likely you know about this, in which case this thumbnail sketch is for other potentially interested set theorists. But I wondered how it might fit in with a unified foundation that you envisage. 
