---
subject: back-to-cantor
id: 13571703000
date: 2013-01-02 18:45:00
from:
  name: "François G. Dorais"
  md5: 7e4c1acfa13dc30227687d82abebf543
  url: http://dorais.org
in-reply-to: 13571571000
published: true
---
I still don't understand why you think set theorists think differently than other mathematicians. There is no brain swap that happens when I switch from doing set theory to doing anything else. I have no problems thinking structurally in either case. 

Categories don't show up very much in some places because because the categories relevant are just too simple. For example, transitive sets are a skeleton for the category of extensional wellfounded relations and there is at most one transitive embedding between two transitive sets. It's also pretty clear which limits exist and which don't and there is nothing very involved in computing what those are. There isn't much to gain in using more sophisticated tools. 

Large parts of set theory are completely structural. To a set theorist, a real is any point in a complete separable metric space (actually, a Polish space since the metric is not directly relevant). Descriptive set theory is the study of definability in such contexts. Again, categories don't pop up much because all uncountable such spaces are Borel isomorphic. There are also topics in set theory that are completely structural and where categories play a key role, such as cardinal characteristics of the continuum and Borel equivalence relations. Forcing and symmetric models also have well understood category theoretic aspects. 

How is this so different from everything else in mathematics?
