---
subject: back-to-cantor
id: 13576813200
date: 2013-01-08 16:42:00
from:
  name: "Andreas Blass"
  md5: e9d6fe68a506efa2ddedad8ced1d154c
published: true
---
A minor comment about "ZFC is now approaching 100 years of reign as the foundation of mathematics": Is there a clear indication of when the reign actually began? Gödel's paper proving the incompleteness theorems refers, in its title, to Principia Mathematica, suggesting that this was still the dominant foundation at that time. Just a few years later, Gödel used NBG as the framework for his consistency proof of AC and GCH, but that choice may have been heavily influenced by the nature of the proof. Since NBG is conservative over ZF, one might regard this as an indication that ZF was beginning its reign (or at least preparing for a coup d'état), but I'm not sure conservativity is a strong enough connection to support such a claim. So when did ZF "really" start to reign? 

A slightly related point: In early work of Erdös on the partition calculus, there are notational distinctions between a cardinal number, the initial ordinal of that cardinality, and the set of ordinals below that initial ordinal. For today's set theorist, this looks like a horrible, unnecessary proliferation of notation, wasting the reader's mental energy on keeping track of the notation, when the energy is really needed for the mathematical content. But from a structural point of view, these notational distinctions make perfect sense; the three concepts really are different. The materialist has just taken advantage of the nice well-founded structure of the ZFC world to identify all three concepts, and we've become so accustomed to the identification that its absence strikes us as very unpleasant.
