---
subject: hott-math-1-elementary-group-theory
id: 13721062610
date: 2013-06-24 16:37:41
from:
  name: "François G. Dorais"
  md5: 7e4c1acfa13dc30227687d82abebf543
  url: http://dorais.org/
in-reply-to: 13720691330
published: true
---
My comment certainly wasn't meant to encourage thinking of the premise of $$\Pi$$-intro as a hypothesis on the same level as the group axioms; I would rather discourage that. But I don't understand your point. The point of informal type theory is to embed the calculus of judgements into common language. There has to be ways of saying _informally_ how the use of this or that rule is justified (when that's not immediately obvious). Ideally, I should never have to talk about rules explicitly, I should have enough key words to say that in prose. My key word for the premise of $$\Pi$$-intro is "uniformity." You can disagree with the choice of word, I don't think it's perfect, it comes from computability theory. I'll stick with it since it's now more-or-less automatic for me to use this word in this way. 

As for examples of non-uniformity in informal type theory. I would rather wait for an example to pop up since artificial examples are never convincing. Note that the point is to informally see when an informal argument is valid or not. If you're looking for a valid proof that can't be formalized, you're looking for the wrong thing. 

There are some very interesting borderline cases... The first thing I would try to generate an interesting one would be the following. Concoct an induction on $$\mathbb{N}$$ where the induction step involves hopping one universe up. This can't be formalized within the universe setting used in the book since the proof wouldn't fit in any universe. A more subtle flaw is that this conflates $$\mathbb{N}$$ and the indexing of the universes, which are not necessarily related at all. However, such an informal proof could be "rescued" by having a richer universe structure. The tricky bit is getting the universe hopping to feel natural. A non-convincing example is a simple unmotivated hop: _There is a universe $$\mathcal{U}(0)$$; every universe $$\mathcal{U}(n)$$ is an element of another universe $$\mathcal{U}(n+1)$$. Therefore, there is a $$\mathcal{U}:\mathbb{N} \to \mathcal{V}$$ such that $$\mathcal{U}(n):\mathcal{U}(n+1)$$ for each $$n$$._ (Meh.) 

I wonder if the typical ambiguity introduced by the universes could also be exploited to generate non-uniform arguments... 

[Edit@14:18 - fixed annoying typo.]
