---
subject: hott-math-1-elementary-group-theory
id: 13722841140
date: 2013-06-26 18:01:54
from:
  name: "Guillaume Brunerie"
  md5: 579b240041b084d221aaf999e0de2929
in-reply-to: 13722807740
published: true
---
Thanks! Do you have a concrete example of something which would require a universe containing infinitely many smaller universes (something like an internal $$U_\omega$$)? 

> Specifying the length of the hierarchy is not necessarily the right way to approach that at first. 

Yes, I agree, I gave explicit ordinals just to make things simple. 

I found a few papers about Martin-Löf type theory with a super universe. If I understood correctly, the idea is that there is a universe forming operation which associates to every family of types $$x:A \vdash B(x)$$ a universe containing $$A$$ and all of the $$B(x)$$. A super universe is then a universe closed under this universe forming operation (see <http://www1.maths.leeds.ac.uk/~rathjen/Super.pdf> and <http://www2.math.uu.se/~palmgren/universe.pdf>) 

That seems interesting, but I didn’t find any other paper about that (or about type theory with more than omega universes) and neither Coq or Agda contain omega+1 universes. 

The way universes are handled in Agda is quite similar to what you are talking about in some comments above. There is an (internalized) abstract type of universe levels called `Level` with the following constants: 

    zero : Level_ _suc : Level -> Level

    max : Level -> Level -> Level

and for every `i : Level`, there is a universe `Type i` (called `Set i` in Agda). 

Then base types (including `Level`) are put in `Type zero`, the universe `Type i` is of type `Type (suc i)` and a Pi-type indexed by something in `Type i` and whose codomain is in `Type j` will be in `Type (max i j)`. It doesn’t give you a universe where the Pi-type `(i : Level) -> Type i` would live, though, because the universe level of the codomain cannot depend on the input. Note that `Level` is abstract, it’s not the natural numbers but just some type having the appropriate operations. 

Maybe the requirement that `Level` is small could be dropped, and the `max` operation could be extended to any small family of levels?
