---
subject: hott-math-1-elementary-group-theory
id: 13721122990
date: 2013-06-24 18:18:19
from:
  name: "François G. Dorais"
  md5: 7e4c1acfa13dc30227687d82abebf543
  url: http://dorais.org/
in-reply-to: 13720691330
published: true
---
It increasingly sounds like we're handling the same stick from opposite ends. What I'm talking about is not writing math but verifying it. This is automatic in formal systems but it is not automatic in informal proofs. For informal type theory to make sense to mathematicians you need to be able to verify it in real time, without having to formalize it. These clues about the use of the rules are for that. When I prove $$A$$ and ten pages later prove $$A \to B$$, I will say something before concluding $$B$$ not because my argument would otherwise be wrong but because it's easier to verify. For the same reason, if my aim is to get an element of type $$\mathsf{lrid}$$ then, in some way or another, I will mention the desired element, not necessarily by writing the $$\lambda$$-expression, but I will find a way to point to the element. It's not necessarily wrong to omit it but it's not good form. 

I don't have a good line of attack for exploiting typical ambiguity. Your response is not really satisfactory though since it requires formalizing the proof. Mathematicians won't like "asking the local type-theorist" any more than they like "asking the local set-theorist." But typical ambiguity isn't what I was exploiting in the universe hopping example. What is wrong with a universe $$\mathcal{V}$$ large enough that there is a $$\mathcal{U}:\mathbb{N}\to\mathcal{V}$$ where each $$\mathcal{U}(n)$$ is a universe and $$\mathcal{U}(n):\mathcal{U}(n+1)$$?
