---
subject: hott-math-2-more-on-equational-logic
id: 13739299260
date: 2013-07-15 19:12:06
from:
  name: "François G. Dorais"
  md5: 7e4c1acfa13dc30227687d82abebf543
  url: http://dorais.org/
in-reply-to: 13739224030
published: true
---
I'm not sure but I can explain why I believe there ought to be some Strong Birkhoff Theorem in HoTT. The basic idea is that the classical proof of completeness has a deliberate information loss, specifically a set truncation. My gut feeling is that the propositional truncation and the set truncation actually get rid of a lot of common information. Consequently, we should be able to truncate less on both sides. Here is the basic idea... 

The classical proof uses a term model. In HoTT, it makes more sense to use a higher inductive type. We have a bunch of Henkin constructors $$a_0,a_1,\dots:A$$ (just some anonymous constants to make sure $$A$$ has enough elements). For every $$k$$-ary operator $$f$$ in our signature, we have a constructor $$f:A^n \to A$$. To get a model of $$\Gamma$$, we need to add some path constructors. Basically, we need to make sure that if $$t \approx s$$ is an identity in $$\Gamma$$ then we have $$\mathfrak{A} \vDash t \approx s$$. There's a few variations that can be used here and I'm not sure whether it makes a difference to pick one over the other. 

At this point, we have an algebra $$\mathfrak{A}$$ that, by definition, satisfies all identities in $$\Gamma$$. To get a set-based algebra, as in the classical completeness proof, we would then take the set-truncation of $$\mathfrak{A}$$ and this would be used to establish the weak completeness theorem for equational logic. If we skip that step, then paths obtained by different proofs retain their distinctness to some extent. To get the strong completeness, all we need is to figure out how much is retained and how much is lost, and appropriately revise the definition of $$\vdash$$. Note that essentially all trivial variations are lost. For example, whenever $$\Gamma = \varnothing$$, the resulting algebra is a set-based, though $$\varnothing \vdash t \approx t$$ technically has more than one proof.
