---
subject: on-the-structure-of-universes-in-hott
id: 13900902680
date: 2014-01-18 19:11:08
from:
  name: "Mike Shulman"
  md5: c72e8ff1dfaaaacdbe9844d0202f378a
  url: http://www.sandiego.edu/~shulman
published: true
---
Thanks for this interesting post. I think we made the right decision in not getting into these issues in the book, but it would be nice to have a more consistent and flexible treatment of universes. I think most formal presentations of type theory do consider "being a type" to be a _judgment_, with a derivation rule which says that if A is an element of a universe, then some a-la-Tarski coercion of it "El(A)" is a type. From this point of view, identifying elements of universes with types is just a convenient abuse of language, and so perhaps universes are not really all that "special" of types after all. Indeed, one direction of possible modifications of the theory (which seems helpful in order to find more sheaf models) is to relax the special-ness of universes even further. 

However, I don't understand what you mean by 

> Thus effect of the remark is not to prohibit other types but only to declare anything else to be an "illegitimate" type.

In particular, I don't understand the difference between "prohibiting" something and "declaring it illegitimate" --- in fact I find both to be a misnomer, because all that we have are rules which _allow_ things, rather than rules which prohibit things. The example of $$\lambda(i:\mathbb{N}) U_i$$ is not allowed by the rules of the theory presented in the book. It's not as if there is a "rule of type formation" which can produce it and then a further "rule of legitimacy" which excludes it. The rule of lambda-abstraction says that if you have an expression _belonging to some type_ which contains a free variable, then you can abstract it over the variable to obtain an element of a (dependent) function type. But "U_i" is not an expression belonging to some single type, so the rule of abstraction does not apply, and so $$\lambda(i:\mathbb{N}) U_i$$ is not part of the syntax of the theory. 

Finally, I've said this before elsewhere, but I'll say it again: I'd like to ask that people not use "HoTT" to refer specifically to the precise type theory used in the first edition of the book. Homotopy type theory refers to the whole _subject_, which has room for many different formal theories, analogously to how "set theory" includes ZFC, ZF, Z, BZC, NBG, MK, etc. The book made some specific choices for reasons of history, convenience, simplicity, and pedagogy, but other choices are more appropriate in other contexts, and I hope that in the future we will come up with improved homotopical type theories (and perhaps the second edition of the book will use such an improved theory). If you want to refer specifically to the book's type theory, one possibility I've suggested is "HoTT v1.0".
