---
subject: on-the-structure-of-universes-in-hott
id: 13901111010
date: 2014-01-19 00:58:21
from:
  name: "François G. Dorais"
  md5: 7e4c1acfa13dc30227687d82abebf543
  url: http://dorais.org/
in-reply-to: 13900902680
published: true
---
Thanks for your comments Mike! I was hoping you would want to discuss this further. 

Yes, that was without a doubt absolutely the right decision for the book. Of course, this doesn't mean that those things shouldn't be discussed elsewhere. Such discussions are difficult to find; I suspect they did happen, at the IAS for example, but there is little record of these. My hope for this post is to spark such a discussion. 

Before going to the other parts, let me address your last paragraph. In the post, I used HoTT as an abbreviation for Homotopy Type Theory in a general sense. There is a formal system presented in the appendix of the book; I will follow your lead and call that HoTT v1.0 if you want though that's not what I meant by HoTT in the post where it refers ambiguously to HoTT v1.0, all the variants I suggested and more. The point of the last paragraph is that HoTT has too few formal systems and the various options need to be discussed and compared. This discussion will likely last for a long while. If the development of HoTT follows a similar path to set theory, over the next two decades or so, one formal system will emerge as the dominant one along with some major and minor alternatives. (Fortunately, the development of type theory appears to be happening at a much faster pace than that of set theory.) More importantly, as a result of this discussion, the differences and correspondences between the formal systems that emerge in the process will be well understood. 

Regarding your first paragraph. I think you might be misunderstanding the issue I'm bringing up, it's not about what types are and how they are coerced from universes, the question is: which types are universes and how are they introduced? The precise mechanism for promoting elements of universes to actual types is mostly immaterial. That is best left under a pretty rug but let's say we use Tarski-style coercions, for the purpose of picking one mechanism. These coercions don't apply to every type; it makes little sense to coerce $$\pi : \mathbb{R}$$ to a standalone type. There must be a way to identify which types are universes and therefore have such coercions as well as all other rules associated to universes. 

In HoTT v1.0, the solution is to have named constants $$\mathcal{U}_0, \mathcal{U}_1,\dots$$ each of which is equipped with all the necessary mechanisms. This is done separately for each constant $$\mathcal{U}_i$$. For example, the $$\Pi$$-form rules explicitly name the universe $$\mathcal{U}_i$$ and therefore doesn't apply to anything other than this $$\mathcal{U}_i$$; if I introduce a new universe constant, I must then introduce a brand new family of $$\Pi$$-form instances to accommodate this new universe. This is the kind of thing I meant by saying "players don’t have all the rules of the game" in the post. There is nothing _wrong_ with this approach but it is not very flexible and I find fiddling with basic rules like that disconcerting. Consider what you actually would need to do to the formal system to accommodate a family $$\mathcal{V}:\mathbb{N}\to\mathcal{U}_{17}$$ consisting of universes... 

I think the alternative scheme I proposed is more pleasant (though, admittedly, I haven't sat down to write a complete formal system). The idea is to have a judgment $$\mathcal{U}\ \mathrm{univ}$$ (or something similar) with associated rules instantiate all the mechanisms necessary for universes. To ensure that there are enough universes, I proposed an introduction rule of the rough form $$A,B\ \mathrm{type} / A, B : \mathcal{U}\ \mathrm{univ}.$$ Without additional features, is essentially equivalent to HoTT v1.0 in the sense that the two systems can interpret each other almost directly. However, this is much more flexible: adding a new universe only involves positing a judgment $$\mathcal{V}\ \mathrm{univ}$$ without changing the basic rules of the system. Even formalizing a type family of universes isn't that much trouble. 

Then again, this is only one possibility. I'm sure there are even better ones though it may take years until we see convergence to solution that minimizes the total amount of awkwardness and inconvenience. 

Regarding your second paragraph. The issue with the quote from the book is that "some universe $$\mathcal{U}_i$$" has no _formal_ meaning: the $$\mathcal{U}_i$$ are constants, there is no formal way to quantify over them. The closest formal interpretation of that quote is through the context rules. The context rules from the book's appendix don't allow us to derive $$a : A\ \mathrm{ctx}$$ unless $$A$$ belongs to some universe $$\mathcal{U}_i$$. But this is not at all the same thing. As you said: "all that we have are rules which allow things, rather than rules which prohibit things." In fact, illegitimate types don't pose much problems and since they can't be derived using the rules HoTT v1.0, they can be entirely nonexistent. But they can also exist and they can actually be quite fun to play with! 

I know the notation $$\lambda i : \mathbb{N}\,.\,\mathcal{U}_i$$ is not meaningful (without a lot of additional context); I was avoiding getting into technical issues by reusing the notation from the quote to suggest an informal idea. I guess the main point there wasn't completely clear. The argument that Classical HoTT (v1.0) proves $$\operatorname{Con}(\mathsf{ZFC} + \mathsf{IC}_i)$$ for every $$i$$ is a perfectly legitimate mathematical argument. Homotopy Type Theory, if it is to be a foundation, should therefore be able to formalize the argument. For purely technical and unavoidable reasons, this argument cannot be formalized into a proof of $$\forall i:\mathbb{N}\,.\,\operatorname{Con}(\mathsf{ZFC} + \mathsf{IC}_i)$$ in Classical HoTT v1.0. The proof can be formalized using a large universe hypothesis. Unfortunately, HoTT v1.0 makes this kind of argument rather difficult. In fact, a strict reading of certain parts of the book explicitly prohibits this kind of argument. This is mostly a non-issue for the book and these parts do simplify some inessential aspects of formal HoTT. However, this kind of thing is unacceptable for a foundation — a foundation shouldn't prohibit or otherwise exclude intuitively correct proofs. It's very hard to read the last paragraph of section 1.3 without thinking that HoTT v1.0 prohibits the existence of a type family of nested universes indexed by $$\mathbb{N}$$.
