---
subject: super-hott
id: 13911195320
date: 2014-01-30 17:05:32
from:
  name: "François G. Dorais"
  md5: 7e4c1acfa13dc30227687d82abebf543
  url: http://dorais.org/
in-reply-to: 13905258970
published: true
---
Thanks Mike, this is very interesting and your comment gave me stuff to think about for a few days... Yes, it is a desirable feature for Tarski-style coercion to preserve type forming operations judgmentally. Unfortunately, this appears to be somewhat incompatible with the presence of a super universe. I looked for a balance of features here but I couldn't reach a definite conclusion. 

To recap, for my own benefit and that of others: In the Super HoTT approach there is only one true Tarski-style coercion for the super universe and other universe only have a $$\tau:\mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{U}^\ast$$ that acts like one but isn't one. After composing $$\tau$$ with the true Tarski-style coercion for the super universe $$\mathcal{U}^*$$, we can only obtain a weak Tarski-style universe since, for example, there is no obvious way to enforce judgmental equality between $$\tau(\pi(A,B))$$ and $$\prod_{x:\tau(A)} \tau(B(x))$$ (as understood by $$\mathcal{U}^*$$). 

This brings up the issue of what judgmental equality is in universes à la Bauer. I haven't found a clear choice here. However, whatever it is, it should be required to match between any two _cumulative_ universes (and this should be part of the definition of cumulative in the context of Super HoTT). It's not clear whether the super universe should be seen as an accumulation of all smaller universes in Super HoTT (which is basically what requiring $$\tau:\mathcal{U}\to\mathcal{U}^*$$ to preserve type forming operations judgmentally amounts to). 

In my initial conception, this was not the case as I envisioned that different universes might interpret natural numbers and other type differently and sometimes in incompatible ways. That way, for example, classical universes and constructive universes could peacefully inhabit the same super universe. The alternative, to formally see the super universe as an accumulation of all universes, would require some additional machinery such as a formal universe operator, as Palmgren describes. While there are advantages to this, additional heavy machinery would ruin the simplicity of Super HoTT and also reduce (or even eliminate) the need for a super universe.
