---
subject: super-hott
id: 14524628350
date: 2016-01-10 16:53:55
from:
  name: "François G. Dorais"
  md5: 7e4c1acfa13dc30227687d82abebf543
  url: http://dorais.org
in-reply-to: 14523693410
published: true
---
Tarski-style refers to having an explicit decoding function $$T$$ which takes an element of a universe $$\mathcal{U}$$ to its type, i.e., with an introduction rule of the form 
^
$$\frac{a : \mathcal{U}}{T(a)\quad\text{type}}.$$
^
 In opposition, Russell-style universes have a rule of the form 
^
$$\frac{A : \mathcal{U}}{A\quad\text{type}}$$
^
 which says that elements of the universe type $$\mathcal{U}$$ are themselves types rather than codes for actual types. 

The two approaches differ on how they handle relations between universes. In Russell-style, one can simply say that one universe is included in another using a rule 
^
$$\frac{A : \mathcal{U}}{A : \mathcal{V}}.$$
^
 In Tarski-style, one needs conversions $$t:\mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{V}$$ that translate $$\mathcal{U}$$-codes into $$\mathcal{V}$$-codes as well as rules that explain how these conversions fit with the decoding functions as expected. 

The issue with Russell-style is that one gets confusing inclusions, especially with inductive types where one gets non-canonical elements coming from smaller universes. Tarski-style doesn't suffer from such confusion since coercions are clearly marked. In practice, Russell-style is construed as shorthand for Tarski-style and the conversions are only invoked to resolve confusions. The "Tarski-style coercions" are all the hidden conversions that happen in this translation. 

When I wrote this post two years ago, I seemed to use "coercion" specifically for the decoding function that convert elements of universes to actual types, separate from the machinery to convert between universes. I don't think this distinction is the typical use; I would probably use the unambiguous "decoding function" if I were to rewrite this today.
